.TH gitcmdb 1 "2026-06-01" "GitCMDB" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gitcmdb \- Git-backed configuration management database CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gitcmdb
.RI " <command> "
.RI " [options]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
GitCMDB manages infrastructure state as JSON documents stored in a filesystem tree and versioned by Git. Each write is validated, applied atomically, and recorded as a commit for auditability.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize the GitCMDB workspace and schema layout.
.TP
.B add host --file <file.json>
Create a host record from a JSON file.
.TP
.B get host <hostname>
Read a host record by hostname.
.TP
.B update host <hostname> --set key=value
Update a host record field.
.TP
.B query hosts [--env <env>] [--status <status>]
Run a query against host records.
.TP
.B history host <hostname>
Show the Git history for a host record.
.TP
.B validate
Validate all data files against JSON schemas.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show help for the top-level CLI.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GITCMDB_ROOT
Root directory for the GitCMDB workspace. Defaults to the repository root when running from source.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I data/<env>/<region>/<type>/
Data storage location for CMDB records.
.TP
.I schemas/
JSON Schema definitions for validation.
.TP
.I man/gitcmdb.1
This manual page.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure or invalid usage.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Initialize a workspace:
.RS
.nf
gitcmdb init
.fi
.RE
.TP
Add a host record:
.RS
.nf
gitcmdb add host --file data/prod/us-east-1/hosts/srv-001.json
.fi
.RE
.TP
Query active hosts:
.RS
.nf
gitcmdb query hosts --env prod --status active
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR jq (1)
